[DOC-362] [2024.1] memory division flags, best practices for tablet overhead (#22378)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/reference/configuration/yb-tserver.md

Default: `false`

## Memory division flags

> These flags are used to determine how the RAM of a node is split between the TServer and other processes, including Postgres and a master process if present, as well as how to split memory inside of a TServer between various internal components like the RocksDB block cache.

Author: fixed, including on master page

{{< warning title="Warning" >}}

> Ensure you do not _oversubscribe memory_ when changing these flags: make sure the amount of memory reserved for TServer and master if present leaves enough memory on the node for Postgres and any needed other processes like monitoring agents plus the memory needed by the kernel.

Author: fixed

### Flags controlling the defaults for the other memory division flags

The memory division flags have multiple sets of defaults; which set of defaults is in force depends on these flags.  Note that these defaults can differ between TServer and master.

##### --use_memory_defaults_optimized_for_ysql

If true, the defaults for the memory division settings take into account the amount of RAM and cores available and are optimized for using YSQL.  If false, the defaults will be the old defaults, which are more suitable for YCQL but do not take into account the amount of RAM and cores available.

Default: `false`

If this flag is true then the memory division flag defaults change to provide much more memory for Postgres; furthermore, they optimize for the node size.

If these defaults are used for both TServer and master then a node's available memory is partitioned as follows:

| node RAM GiB (_M_): | _M_ &nbsp;&le;&nbsp; 4 | 4 < _M_ &nbsp;&le;&nbsp; 8 | 8 < _M_ &nbsp;&le;&nbsp; 16 | 16 < _M_ |
| :--- | ---: | ---: | ---: | ---: |
| TServer %  | 45% | 48% | 57% | 60% |
| master %   | 20% | 15% | 10% | 10% |
| Postgres % | 25% | 27% | 28% | 27% |
| other %    | 10% | 10% |  5% |  3% |

> To read this table, take your node's available memory in GiB, call it _M_, and find the column who's heading condition _M_ meets.  For example, a node with 7 GiB of available memory would fall under the column labeled "4 < _M_ &le; 8" because 4 < 7 &le; 8.  The defaults for [`--default_memory_limit_to_ram_ratio`](#default-memory-limit-to-ram-ratio) on this node will thus be `0.48` for TServers and `0.15` for masters. The Postgres and other percentages are not set via gflag currently but rather consist of whatever memory is left after TServer and master take their cut.  There is currently no distinction between Postgres and other memory except on YBM where a cgroup is used to limit the Postgres memory.

Author: fixed

Default: `false`

## Memory division flags

These flags are used to determine how the RAM of a node is split between the TServer and other processes, including Postgres and a master process if present, as well as how to split memory inside of a TServer between various internal components like the RocksDB block cache.

{{< warning title="Warning" >}}

> Be careful to ensure you do not oversubscribe memory when changing these flags: make sure the amount of memory reserved for TServer and master if present leaves enough memory on the node for Postgres and any needed kernel and other processes like monitoring agents.

Author: fixed

{{< /warning >}}

### Flags controlling the defaults for the other memory division flags

> The memory division flags have multiple sets of defaults; which set of defaults is in force depends on these flags.  Note also that these flags have different defaults for master processes.

Author: I found my original version awkward so changed it to:
Note that these defaults can differ between TServer and master.

##### --use_memory_defaults_optimized_for_ysql

> If true, the defaults for the memory division settings take into account the amount of RAM and cores available and are optimized for using YSQL.  If false, the recommended defaults will be the old defaults, which are more suitable for YCQL but do not take into account the amount of RAM and cores available.

Author: not fixing; two spaces after periods is standard for monospace fonts like markdown.
verified that it looks fine in the actual HTML output

Default: `false`

If this flag is true then the memory division flag defaults change to provide much more memory for Postgres; furthermore, they optimize for the node size.

If these defaults are used for both TServer and master then a node's available memory is partitioned as follows:

| node RAM GiB: | (0,4] | (4,8] | (8,16] | (16,infinity) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| TServer %  | 45% | 48% | 57% | 60% |
| master %   | 20% | 15% | 10% | 10% |
| Postgres % | 25% | 27% | 28% | 27% |
| other %    | 10% | 10% |  5% |  3% |

> To read this table, take your node's available memory in GiB and find the column who's heading interval it falls under.  For example, a 7 GiB node would fall in the (4,8] interval because it is bigger than 4 and less than or equal to 8.  The defaults for [`--default_memory_limit_to_ram_ratio`](#default-memory-limit-to-ram-ratio) on this node will thus be `0.48` for TServers and `0.15` for masters. The Postgres and other percentages are not set via gflag today but rather consist of whatever memory is left after TServer and master take their cut.

Author: fixed the flag part.  Left the interval alone.  This is a math notation: (x,y]  means the half-open interval starting just after x going up to *and including* y.  I give an example to help clarify this.

if you think this is too confusing, please push back

For comparison, when `--use_memory_defaults_optimized_for_ysql` is `false`, the split is TServer 85%, master 10%, Postgres 0%, and other 5%.

> The defaults for the within TServer partitioning flags when `--use_memory_defaults_optimized_for_ysql` is true do not depend on the node size and are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The defaults for the TServer partitioning flags when `--use_memory_defaults_optimized_for_ysql` is true do not depend on the node size, and are described in the following table:
```

Author: a bit wordy, but change made

| flag | default |
| :--- | :--- |
| --db_block_cache_size_percentage | 32 |
| --tablet_overhead_size_percentage | 10 |

_still being written..._

### Flags controlling the split of memory among processes

Note that in general these flags will have different values for TServer and master processes.

##### --memory_limit_hard_bytes

> Maximum amount of memory this process should use in bytes, its hard memory limit.  A value of `0` specifies to instead use a percentage of the total system memory; see [`--default_memory_limit_to_ram_ratio`](#default-memory-limit-to-ram-ratio) for the percentage used.  A value of `-1` disables all memory limiting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maximum amount of memory this process should use in bytes, that is, its hard memory limit. A value of `0` specifies to instead use a percentage of the total system memory; see [`--default_memory_limit_to_ram_ratio`](#default-memory-limit-to-ram-ratio) for the percentage used. A value of `-1` disables all memory limiting.
```

Author: text added

Default: `0`

##### --default_memory_limit_to_ram_ratio

The percentage of available RAM to use for this process if [`--memory_limit_hard_bytes`](#memory-limit-hard-bytes) is `0`.  The special value `-1000` means to instead use the default value for this flag.  Available RAM excludes memory reserved by the kernel.

Default: `0.85` unless [`--use_memory_defaults_optimized_for_ysql`](#use-memory-defaults-optimized-for-ysql) is true.

### Flags controlling the split of memory within a TServer

##### --db_block_cache_size_bytes

> Size of the shared RocksDB block cache (in bytes).  A value of `-1` specifies to instead use a percentage of this processes' hard memory limit; see [`--db_block_cache_size_percentage`](#db_block_cache_size_percentage) for the percentage used.  A value of `-2` disables the block cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Size of the shared RocksDB block cache (in bytes). A value of `-1` specifies to instead use a percentage of this processes' hard memory limit; see [`--db_block_cache_size_percentage`](#db_block_cache_size_percentage) for the percentage used. A value of `-2` disables the block cache.
```

Author: not fixing

Default: `-1`

##### --db_block_cache_size_percentage

> Percentage of our hard memory limit to use for the shared RocksDB block cache, if [`--db_block_cache_size_bytes`](#db-block-cache-size-bytes) is that `-1`.  The special value `-1000` means to instead use the default value for this flag.  The special value `-3` means to use a older default that does not take the amount of RAM into account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Percentage of Yugabyte's hard memory limit to use for the shared RocksDB block cache, if [`--db_block_cache_size_bytes`](#db-block-cache-size-bytes) is `-1`.  The special value `-1000` means to instead use the default value for this flag.  The special value `-3` means to use an older default that does not take the amount of RAM into account.
```

Author: changed Yugabyte's to process';  made other fixes

Default: `50` unless [`--use_memory_defaults_optimized_for_ysql`](#use-memory-defaults-optimized-for-ysql) is true.

##### --tablet_overhead_size_percentage

> Percentage of our hard memory limit to use for tablet-related overheads. A value of `0` means no limit.  Must be between `0` and `100` inclusive. Exception: `-1000` specifies to instead use the default value for this flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Percentage of Yugabyte's hard memory limit to use for tablet-related overheads. A value of `0` means no limit. Must be between `0` and `100` inclusive. Exception: `-1000` specifies to instead use the default value for this flag.
```

Author: ditto
